---
layout: post
title: "GraphPPL.jl: A Probabilistic Programming Language for Graphical Models"
authors: Wouter W. L. Nuijten, Dmitry Bagaev, Bert de Vries
excerpt: Wouter W. L. Nuijten, Dmitry Bagaev, Bert de Vries
date: 22/10/2024, 12:00:00
modified: 22/10/2024, 12:00:00
tags: [Bayesian inference, factor graphs, nested models, probabilistic programming]
comments: false
category: publication
---

**Authors:  Wouter W. L. Nuijten, Dmitry Bagaev, Bert de Vries**



**Abstract** 

This paper presents GraphPPL.jl, a novel Probabilistic Programming Language designed for graphical models. GraphPPL.jl uniquely represents probabilistic models as Factor Graphs. A notable feature of GraphPPL.jl is its model nesting capability, which facilitates the creation of modular graphical models and significantly simplifies the development of large (hierarchical) graphical models. Furthermore, GraphPPL.jl offers a plugin system to incorporate inference-specific information into the graph, allowing integration with various well-known inference algorithms. To demonstrate that, GraphPPL.jl includes a flexible plugin to define a Constrained Bethe Free Energy minimization process, also known as Variational Inference. In particular, the constrained Bethe Free Energy defined by GraphPPL.jl serves as a potential inference framework for numerous well-known inference backends, making it a versatile tool for diverse applications. This paper details the design and implementation of GraphPPL.jl, highlighting its power, expressiveness, and user-friendliness. It also emphasizes the clear separation it maintains between model definition and inference while providing developers with extensibility and customization options.

**Published in: [MDPI Entropy](https://www.mdpi.com/journal/entropy/)**

<!-- **[pdf available on ArXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.12167)** -->